In today’s society, the political spectrum is usually conceptualized by the predominant part of general population as one dimensional plane, which places different ideologies on an interval from left to right.  However, over the several decades the complexity of political views changed quite significantly, which makes this established viewpoint no longer accurate and may lead to paradoxes bad analogies. Thus it seems more reasonable to use multidimensional representation, such as political compass. Apart from that, on such spectrum we tend to think of ideological extremes, such as communism and fascism to correspond to far left and far right. The centrist policies are generally considered moderate, however the extreme of center is often not scrutinized.
This brings us to a certain phenomenon known as radical centrism, though one may distinguish the words radical and extreme as radical usually thrives for fundamental change, while extremism often preserves status quo, rejecting political discourse and even advocating for violence. Extreme centrism often puts emphasis on pragmatism over ideology and the radical rejection of all radical ideas that may challenge the status quo, resulting in a contradiction. Extreme centrists often advocates of choosing lesser evil which doesn’t undermine the consensus of those in power. Examples of this are politicians such as Hillary Clinton, Justin Trudeau or Emanuel Macron, who align well with the values such as neoliberalism and preservation of the system. Frequently such people are mislabel as liberal, only superficially aligning with those values in opportunistic manner.  
To conclude, the rise of extreme centrism in last decades may be attributed to multiple things. Analogy could be made with this postmodern era of skepticism and anti-ideology, which acts as ideology without the awareness of its self to the Thus spoke Zarathustra from Nietzsche and the idea that in society where God is dead, nihilism takes place in society. Things like neoliberalism with progressive policies packed to a post-ideological era. One may even consider extreme centrism as meta-politics in the same way populism is.




