It might seem necessary at the outset to say more about
the method of this movement, Le. of Science. But its Notion is
already to be found in what has been said, and its proper exposi u
tion belongs to Logic, or rather it is Logie. For the method is
nothing but the struct,ure set forth in its pure essentiality. We
should realize, however, that the system of ideas concerning
philosophical method is yet another set of current beliefs that
belongs to a bygone culture. If this comment sounds boastful
or revolutionary--.-.and I am far from adopting such a tone-
it should be noted that current opinion itself has already come
to view the scientific regime bequeathed by mathe.matics as
quite. old-fashioned-with its explanations, divisions, axioms, sets
of theorems, its proofs, principles, deductions> and conclusions
from them. EvenJf its unfitness is not clearly understood, little
or no use is any longer made of it; and though not actually
condemned outright, no one likes it very much. And we should
be sufficiently prejudiced in favour of what is excellent, to sup-
pose that it will be put to usc, and will find acceptance. But
it is not difficult to see that the way of asserting- a proposition,
adducing reasons for itland in the same way refuting its oppo-
site by reasons, is not theform in which truth can appear. Truth
is its own self-movement, whereas the method just described
is the mode of cognition that remains e><;ternal to its material.
Hence itis peculiar to mathematics, and must he left· to that
science, w4kh, as we have noted, has for its principle the rela-
tionship of magnitude, a relationship alien to the Notion, and
for its material dead space and the equally- lifeless numerical
unit. This method, too} ina looser form, i.e. more blended with
thearhitraryand the accidental, may retain its place, as in con-
versation, or in a piece ofhistorical instruction designed rather
to satisfy curiosity than to produce knowledge, which is about
what a preface amounts to. In ordinary life, consciousness has
for its content items of information, experiences, concrete
PREFACE
objects of sense, thoughts, basic principles,-anything will do
as a content, as long as it is ready to hand~ or is accepted as
a fixed and stable being or essence. Sometimes consciousness
follows where this leads, sometimes it breaks the chain, and
deals arbitrarily with its content, behaving as if it were deter a
mining and manipulating it from outside. It. refers the content
back to some certainty or other, even if only to the sensation
of the moment; and conviction is satisfied when a famiJiar resta
ing-place is reached.
49. But we have already pointed out that, once the necessity
of the Notion has banished the slipshod style of conversational
discussion, and along with it the pedantry and pomposity of
science, they are not to be replaced by the non-method of pre-
sentiment and inspiration, or by the arbitrariness of prophetic
utterance, both of which despise not only scientific pomposity,
but scientific procedure of all kinds.
50. Of course, the triadicform must not be regarded as scien..
tific when it is reduced to a lifeless schema, a mere shadow,
and when scientific organization is degraded into a table of
terms. Kant rediscovered this triadic form by instinct, but in
his work it was still lifeless and uncomprehended; :since then
it has, however, been raised to its absolute significance, and
with it the true form in its true content has been presented,
so that the Notion of' Science has emerged. This formalism, of
which we have already spoken generally and whose style we
wish here to describe in more detail, imagines that it has com..
prehended and expressed the nature and life of a form when
it has endowed it with some determination of the schema as
a predicate. The'predicate may be subjectivity or objectivity,
Of, say, magnetism, electricity, etc" contraction or expansion,
east or west, and the like. Such predicates can be'multiplied
to infinity, since in this way each determination or form can
again be used as a form or moment in the case of an other,
and each can gratefully perform the same service for an other.
In this sort of circle of reciprocity one never learns what the
thing itself is, nor what the one or the other is. In such a pro..
cedure, sometimes determinations of sense are picked up from
everyday intuition, and they are supposed, of course, to mean
something different from what they say; sometimes what is in
itself meaningful, e.g. pure determinations of thought like sub-
PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT
ject, Object, Substance, Cause, Universal, etc.-these are used
just as thoughtlessly and uncritically as we use them in everyday
life, or as we use ideas like strength and weakness, expansion.
and contraction; the metaphysics is in the former case as un-
scientific as are our senSUDUS representatiDns in the latter.
5I. Instead of the inner life and self-movement of its exist-
ence, this kind of simple determinateness of intuition-which
means here sense-knowledge-is predicated in accordance with
a superficial analogy, and this external, empty application of
the formula is called a 'construction'. This formalism isjust like
any other. What a dullard a man must be who could not be
taught in a quarter ofan hour the theory that there are ,asthenic,
sthenic, and indirectly asthenic diseases, and as many modes
of treatment;1 and, since till quite recently such instruction
sufficed, who could not hope t.o be transformed in this short
space of time from an empirical into a theoretical physician?
The formalism of such a 'Philosophy of Nature' teaches, say,
that the Understanding is Electricity, or the Animal is Nitro-
gen, or that they are the equivalentof the South or North Pole,
etc., or represent it-whether all this is expressed as baldly as
here or even concocted withm.ore terminol.ogy~and cOn-
fr'Ollted with su(:h a power which brings together things that
appear to lie far apart, and with the violence suffered by the
passive things ofsense through slich association, and which im-
parts to them the Notion's semblance butsavesitselfthe trolJ,ble
.ofdoing the main thing, viz. expressing the Notion itself or the
meaning .of the sensuous representation-confronted with all
this, the untutored mind may be filled with admiration and
astonishment, and may venerate in it the profound work .of
genius. It may be delighted, too, with the clarity ofslJ,ch charac-
teri~ations, since these replac~ the abstract Notion with some-
t4ing that can be intuitively apprehended, and so made more
pleasing; and it may cDngratulate itself on feeling a kinship of
sDul with such a splendid performance. The knack .of this kind
.of wisdom is as quickly learned as it is easy to practise; once
familiar, the repetition of it becomes as insufferable as the
repetition ofa conjuring trick already seen thrDugh. The instru-
ment of this monotonous formalism is no more difficult to
handle than a painter's palette ~aving only two colours) say
1 SOkcalled Brownianism: John Brown, Elementa medicinae, 1780.
PREFACE 3 1
red and green, the one for colouring the surface when a histori-
cal scene is wanted, the other for landscapes. It would be hard
to decide which is greater in all this, the casual ease with which
everything in heaven and on earth and under the earth is coated
with this broth ofcolour, or the conceit regarding the excellence
of this universal recipe: each supports the other. What results
from this method of labelling aU that is in heaven and earth
with the few determinations of the genera] schema, and pigeon-
holing everything in this way, is nothing less than a 'report
clear as noonday'1 on the universe as an organism, viz. a synop-
tic table like a skeleton with scraps of paper stuck all over it,
or like the rows of closed and labelled boxes in a grocer's stall.
It is as easy to read off as either of these; and just as all the
flesh and blood has been stripped from this skeleton, and the
no longer living 'essence' [Sache] has been packed away in
the boxes, so in the report the living essence of the matter [Wesen
derSache] has been stripped away or boxed up dead. We have
already remarked that this way of thinking at the same time
culminates in a style of painting that is absolutely monochro-
matic; for it is ashamed ofits schematic distinctions, these pro-
ducts of reflection, and submerges them all in the void of the
Absolute, from which pure identity, formless whiteness, is pro-
duced. This monochromatic character of the schema and its
lifeless determinations, this absolute identity, and the transition
from one to the other, are all equally products of the lifeless
Understanding and external cognition.
52. The excellent, however, not only cannot escape the fate
of being thus deprived of life and Spirit, of being flayed and
then seeing its skin wrapped around a lifeless knowledge and
its conceit. Rather we recognize even in thi's fate the power that
the excellent exercises over the hearts, if not over the minds,
of men; also the constructive unfolding into universality and
determinateness of form in which its perfection consists, and
which alone makes it possible for this universality to be used
in a superficial way. '
53. Science dare only organize itself by the life of the Notion
itself. The determinateness, which is taken from the schema
and externally attached to an existent thing, is, in Science, the
1 An allusion to Fichte's Sun-clear Report to the Public about the True &sence if the Newest
Philosophy (180 I ).
PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT
self-moving soul of the realized content. The movement of a
being that immediately is, consists partly in becoming an other
than itself, and thus becoming its own immanent content;
partly in taking back into itself this unf01ding [of its content]
or this existence of it, i.e. in making itself into a moment, and
simplifying itself into something determinate. In the former
movement, negativity is the differentiating and positing of exist-
ence; in this return into selt: it is the becoming of the determinate
simplicity. It is in this way that the content shows that its deter-
minateness is not received from something else, nor externally
attached to it, but that it determines itself, and ranges itself as
a moment having its own place in the whole. The Understand-
ing, in its pigeon-holing process, keeps the nec.essity and Notion
of the content to itself-all that constitutes the concreteness,
the actuality, the living movement of the reality which it
arranges. Or rather, it does not keep this to itself) since it does
not recognize it; for, iflt had this insight, it would surely give
some sign of it. It does not even recognize the need for it, else
it would drop its s.chematizing, or at least realize that it can
never hope to learn more in this fashion than one can learn
from a table of contents. A table of contel1ts is all that it offers,
the content itself it does not offer at all.
Even when the specific determinateness--ccSayone like Mag,..
netism, for exall1ple,-is in itself concrete or real, the Under-
standing degrades it into something lifeless, merely predicating
it of another existent thing, rather than cognizing it as the
immanent life of the thing, or cognizing its native and unique
way ofgenerating and expressing itselfin that thing. The formal
Understanding leaves it to others to add this principal feature.
Instead of entering into the immanent content of the thing, it
is forever surveying the whole and standing above the particu-
lar existence of which it is speaking, i.e. it does not see it at
all. Scientific cognition, on the contrary, demands surrender
to the life of the object, Of, what amounts to the same thing,
confronting and expressing its inner necessity. Thus, absorbed
in its object, scientific cognition forgets about that general sur-
vey, which is merely the reflection of the cognitive process away
from the content and back into itself. Yet, immersed in the
material, and advancing with its movement, scientific cognition
does come back to itself, but not before its filling or content
is taken back into itself, is simplified into a determinateness,
and has reduced itself to one aspect of its own existence and
passed over into its higher truth. Through this process the
si"mple, self-surveying whole itself emerges from the wealth in
which its reflection seemed to be lost.
In general, because,. as we put it above, substance is in
itself or implicitly Subject, all content is its own reflection into
itself. The subsistence or substance of anything that exists is
its self-identity; for a failure ofself-identity would be its dissolu-
tion. Self-identity, however, is pure abstraction; but this is think-
ing. When I say 'quality', I am saying simple determinateness;
ids by quality that one existence is distinguished from another,
or is an existence; it is for itself, or it subsists through this simple
oneness withitself. But it is thereby essentially a thought. Com-
prehended in this is the fact that Being is Thought; and this
is the source ofthat insight which usually eludes the usual super-
ficial [begrijfios] talk about the identity of Thought and
Being.-Now; since the subsistence of an existent thing is a self-
identity or pure abstraction, it is the abstraction of itself from
itself, or it is itself its lack of self... identity and its dissolution-
its own inwardness and withdrawal intoitself--its own becom-
ing. Because this is the nature of what is, and in sofar as what
is has this natyre for [our] knowing, this knowing is not an
activity that deals with the content as something alien, is not
a reflection,iutoitselfaway from the content. Science is not that
ideali&m which replaced the dogmatism of assertion with a
dogmatism of assurance, or a dogmatism of self~certainty. On
the contrary, sinc,e [our] knowing sees the contentreturn into
its own inwardness, its activity is totally absorbed in the con-
tent, for it is the immanent self of the content; yet it has at the
same time returned into itself, for it is pure self-identity in other-
ness. Thus it is the cunning which, while seeming to abstain
from activity, looks on and watches how determinateness, with
its concrete life, just where it fandes it is pursuing its own self-
preservation and particular interest, is in fact doing the very
opposite, is an activity that results in its own dissolution, and
makes itself a moment of the whole.Above we indicated the significance of the Understanding
in reference to the self-consciousness of substance; we can now
see clearly from what has been said its significance in reference
34 PHENOMENOLOGY OF SPIRIT
to the determination of substance as being. Existence is
Quality, self.·identical determinateness, or determinate sim-
plicity, determinate thought; this is the Understanding of exist-
ence [i.e. the nature of existence from the standpoint of the
Understanding]. Hence, it is J.lous, as Anaxagoras first recog-
nized the essence of things to be. 
Those who came after him
grasped the nature of existence more definitely as Eidos or Idea,
determinate Univ.ersality, Species or Kind. It might seem >as
if the term Species or Kind is too commonplace, too inadequate,
for Ideas such as the Beautiful, the Holy, and the Eternal that
are currently in fashion. But as a matter of fact Idea expresses
neither more nor less than Species or Kind. But nowadays an
expression which exactly designates a Notion is often spurned
in favour ofone which, ifonly because it is offoreign extraction,
shrouds the Notion in a fog, and hence sounds more edifying.